In 1995, NASA attempted something no one
had ever tried before.
This is the Jupiter Galileo probe,
[music]
the first spacecraft to ever enter a gas
planet.
It performed one of the most complex
space maneuvers of its time,
and it was one of the most advanced
pieces of technology NASA had ever made.
This is the story of the genius design
of the Galileo probe,
and it's the story of the first time we
entered the king of [music] planets,
Jupiter.
147 days before entry,
explosive nuts separate Galileo's
orbiter from its probe. Spinning like a
bullet from a gun, it heads to a target
[music] 81 million kilometers away.
It needed to be shot just right. Too
steep and it would burn away before any
valuable measurements could be taken.
Too wide and it would never enter to
begin with.
For now, [music] it was on its own
on a one-way mission to gather the first
samples of the largest gas planet in our
solar system.
14 days after the release, the orbiter
reoriented. It fired its engines. It
redirects away from the path it set its
companion [music] on.
From a distance, it could capture the
data transmitted from the probe
>> [music]
>> and retransmit it back to Earth.
9 days before entry,
the orbiter powers on its antenna. Once
the probe enters the atmosphere, it will
only have minutes to find its signal
before the data is lost forever.
6 [music] hours before entry,
the probe turns on.
Its batteries flood the instruments
[music] that were dormant for nearly a
decade.
It has passed a point of no return,
entering Jupiter's inner magnetosphere.
[music]
It was a no-man's zone, an uncharted
region filled with a vast array
>> [music]
>> of unstudied and brutally energetic
particles.
The energetic particle instrument is the
first to wake up.
A small device, it begins to collect
data, taking in its new surroundings, up
to 3 million particles [music] every
second.
As the EPI races against time, another
instrument, sharing space in the cramped
electronics box,
>> [music]
>> also turns on.
Years before, two night photographs
taken by Voyager 1 on [music] its flyby
of Jupiter seemed to show evidence for a
strange possibility,
lightning.
On Earth, the most understood form of
lightning was the result of interactions
between clouds and the ground,
but Jupiter has no ground.
It was unknown how Jovian lightning
[music] would behave.
Protected behind a small radio frequency
window [music]
in the probe's aft heat shield, radio
waves could still be picked up.
From it, the antenna for the lightning
and radio emission [music] detector,
LRD, searched through the noise for the
telltale radio signature of a lightning
strike.
The antenna was short, but radio signals
were not enough [music] to verify the
existence of lightning.
They needed light.
Two [music] sensitive photodiodes
mounted behind individual fish eye
lenses,
180° apart [music]
to maximize the field of view.
3 hours and 4 minutes before entry,
360,000 [music]
km away, measurements of Jupiter's inner
radiation belt began.
For the next 3 hours, once an hour, the
[music] EPI and LRD instruments took
rounds of measurements.
They only stopped once they reached the
edge of Jupiter's atmosphere.
16 minutes and 38 seconds [music] before
entry,
the planet had grown on the horizon to
take up the entire sky.
It began collecting data about its
surroundings.
3 minutes [music] before entry,
flying 214,000 km away, the measurements
above the orbit cycles into a new series
of commands [music] and the onboard tape
recorder starts.
Below it, the probe has begun [music]
its descent. A dart has been thrown half
a billion miles into the center of an
enormous interplanetary dartboard,
and it was [music] coming in hot,
pulling 47.4 km per second.
The entire probe was [music] 49 in at
its widest and 34 in tall, but it
weighed nearly as much as a vending
machine.
It was composed of two parts, an outer
shell for deceleration and an inner
module for the descent on a parachute.
The shell was the outer deceleration
module. Its shape chosen [music] to
minimize weight, base diameter, and
ballast.
It had to survive and slow the probe
enough for it to deploy its [music]
parachutes.
Look at you.
Sitting there, alone,
staring at your blank walls like some
kind of monk who's achieved inner peace
through the absence of personality.
"I don't need stuff." [music]
You tell yourself.
"My bare white wall is a statement."
While you scroll AI slop.
>> [music]
>> Your brain is chaos and you're trying to
find calm by keeping your apartment
>> [music]
>> as mundane and boring as possible.
That's not peace. It's lack of
character.
Displate makes metal posters,
>> [music]
>> over 2 million designs, games, films,
abstract art, officially licensed stuff
from Marvel to Star [music] Wars.
Or you can upload your own image, like I
did, and they'll print it on steel.
It makes a great gift and you can
customize your art with their filters.
[music]
Once it arrives, they mount with
magnets. No drilling, no holes, no
commitment issues.
Swap them whenever you feel like being a
different person, which based on your
current decorating choices should be
now.
Stop cosplaying as someone above wanting
things. Your walls are crying out
anything that you can show someone else
that's meaningful.
Link in the description.
displate.com/l/hoog
and use the code hoog for up to 35% off.
Jupiter had no surface,
>> [music]
>> not as we know it, just a never-ending
storm of turbulent gas.
Height in the sky, the planet with no
surface is measured based on pressure.
The altitude is measured relative to
when pressure on the surface equals
Earth at sea level, one bar of pressure.
The probe entered Jupiter when it
reached 450 km above one bar.
Entry.
>> [music]
>> It was tough, but entering the
atmosphere was only 0.4 km per second
slower
>> [music]
>> than it was built to withstand. Any
faster and the probe would burn up.
Its arrival marked [music] the edge of
Jupiter's outer atmosphere, a mysterious
cocktail of clouds that had never been
directly sampled.
The event triggered a short cylindrical
device on board,
>> [music]
>> and the atmospheric structure instrument
starts to record. Made up of three
sensors, it could measure temperature,
pressure, and changes in acceleration as
the probe's altitude changed through its
descent.
The probe [music] was burning, 352° C.
It was more than hot enough to It was
more than hot enough to destroy the
instruments [music] hidden within it.
The outer deceleration module just
needed to hold.
It had been constructed [music] in two
segments, a heavy forward heat shield
and a thinner afterbody heat shield. The
forward heat shield, known as the
aeroshell,
>> [music]
>> was made from aluminum alloys and held
the inner descent module in place. It
was large, taking up nearly half of the
probe's mass.
On entry, the cone was aimed down. Its
nose piece constructed from carbon
phenolic, a material popular for
re-entry vehicles [music] on Earth.
Its job was to burn and by burning
transfer the heat generated out and
away.
The thinner afterbody heat shield, in
contrast, [music]
was only 16 kg. The aluminum dome was
held in place at its base by a ring,
which connected it to the forward heat
shield. Along it, each 120° apart, three
explosive bolts waited, ready for a
rapid separation.
35 seconds after entry,
the next 15 seconds, the probe
withstands the worst of its
deceleration, pulling 228 Gs.
In moments, it had traveled 230 km,
pressure around it slowly rising to
0.001 bars.
So far up into the upper atmosphere, it
should have been cold, but close to the
probe, the heat was vicious.
The front reaching temperatures more
than twice the surface temperature of
the sun.
It was a man-made meteor.
The heat shields began to break, leaving
behind a trail of vaporized metal.
1 minute and 20 seconds after entry,
the worst of the deceleration had
passed, but with it, over half of the
forward heat shield was gone. 90 kg lost
in less than 2 minutes.
The incandescent descent of the probe
had now been hopefully slowed enough to
prevent the parachute from being ripped
apart when it opened.
And at 0.1 bars, it was time,
but something was wrong.
The parachute hadn't deployed.
Two switches were cross-wired or
timing's off.
All that work and time for the probe to
fail at its most important moment.
Without a signal, the probe continues to
fall, pressure rising, 0.1 bars, 0.2
bars. It plummeted, 0.3 bars.
But at 0.41 bars, the probe snapped to
life.
Cables were severed, and the nuts
holding the cover in place were fired,
releasing it and pulling the pilot chute
into the wake, which, as it was pulled
out, stripped the bag holding the main
parachute.
The aft heat shield fell away into the
rapidly cooling air in the probe's wake,
minus 145° C.
2 minutes and 52 seconds after entry.
Now only 23 km above Earth's sea level,
within moments, the pilot chute yanked
the main parachute free from its
enclosure. The enormous main chute
unfurled, and as it did, swiveling to
decouple the deceleration and descent
modules.
Within 1.2 seconds, the parachute was
free.
To survive such a violent deployment at
Mach 0.9, the main parachute was made
from Dacron and Kevlar.
9 seconds later, the aeroshell was
jettisoned with three explosive bolts.
>> [music]
>> The probe was now floating through the
strange sky of a gas giant, an unknown
alien world.
Instruments hummed to life and the
metallic arm of a new instrument
deployed out of the freed descent
module.
A nephelometer, an NP or nephila, Greek
for cloud, was an instrument designed to
study the composition of Jupiter's
clouds.
As the probe fell, it took measurements
of the clouds every kilometer.
The arm was only one part of the white
box. The reflector in the arm was used
to scatter light emitted from NP's laser
back into the instrument's [music]
detector.
By measuring how the light scattered, it
could study the physical properties of
the clouds.
The remaining descent module, hidden
beneath a smooth shell like a pearl at
the heart of a large oyster, was finally
exposed to the atmosphere.
3 minutes after entry.
Once the aeroshell had dropped 30 m
away, the remaining [music] science
instruments came to life.
The descent module carried seven in
total. Each had been carefully selected
for the first up and close encounter
with a suite of technology used to
collect and transmit the data safely up
to the orbiter,
which in turn would transmit back to
Earth some 778 million kilometers away.
Altogether, the science instruments only
made up 28 kg of the entire probe.
The probe was 21 km above Earth sea
level and falling fast, 650 km/h, as the
temperature continued to fall to minus
145° C.
The main parachute caught in the Jovian
atmosphere, slowing the remaining
descent module to 430 km/h.
3 minutes and 2 seconds after entry.
The first direct sampling of Jupiter's
atmosphere began. Now at 0.42 bars, late
[music] due to the delay in launching
the parachute, the probe collected all
the data on board, its transmitter
searching the sky above it for the
orbiter. Without it, the data would be
lost forever.
Exactly 1 minute after the descent
began, it locked onto the signal of its
scientific companion.
>> [music]
>> The probe had fallen another 4 km and
the pressure had to 0.56 bars in less
than 30 seconds.
Far above, the orbiter received the data
via the relay radio hardware, a large
1.1 m steerable parabolic dish mounted
to the orbiter. 4 minutes and 8 seconds
after entry.
Within seconds, the orbiter received all
the backup data the probe had
accumulated on its long flight before
entering orbit, now interwoven with the
real-time data.
The probe had shot through 450 km of
clouds and gas and was now reaching its
own kind of summit as it crossed the
atmospheric surface at 1 bar.
With it, the cold outer atmosphere cloud
layers had begun to give way to inner
heat of the planet. The temperature had
risen from -135°C
to -107°C.
It would only grow hotter from here. 9
minutes and 36 seconds after entry, the
temperature had shot up again. At 1.6
bars, it was -80°C.
Onboard instruments could retrieve
information about Jupiter's makeup,
but one had just triggered that would be
able to tell a story about the beginning
of the universe. [music]
When the outside pressure reached 2.5
bars, the thin metal diaphragm holding
gas within the helium abundance detector
had burst.
This pushed a small needle device into
the second diaphragm,
mixing the reference gas and Jovian
atmosphere together,
rapidly taking measurements.
Hydrogen and helium are among the most
abundant elements in the universe, but
the ratio of them early after the Big
Bang was not well understood, making
models difficult to construct.
Gas giants like Jupiter were thought to
preserve the helium abundance created in
the Big Bang like an enormous time
capsule.
The HAD could continue to collect and
compare data until the reference gas had
fully expanded to the local ambient
pressure, at about 12 bars, expected
roughly 30 minutes into the descent if
the probe made it that far.
Shaped like a small bomb, data collected
in the pressurized titanium housing of
the neutral mass spectrometer was
released. The first round of direct
chemical sampling of an alien world were
completed as the pressure rose to 3.8
bars.
22 minutes after entry.
When the probe entered the predicted
water cloud level, it was now 0° C
and 5 bars.
And the probe had fallen to minus 56 km
below the Earth one bar level. As the
probe descended deeper through layers of
cloud cover, changes in temperature led
to regions of heating and cooling.
These gradients can produce turbulent
winds that plagues the planet and
controls the circulation of the
atmosphere. To measure the changes in
temperature and flux, the net flux
radiometer contains six detectors.
The electronics box was bolted to the
instrument shelf.
An optical head extended out of the
probe through the thermal blanket and
aeroshell to directly view the
atmosphere's radiation through a tough
diamond window with a small 300 MW
heater to warm it up and prevent
condensation build-up.
Atmospheric chemistry changes with
altitude. So, now at 8.6 bars, the
second round of sampling began. The
probe had been built to withstand at
least 10 bars and 35 minutes into its
journey, the probe had reached the end
of its planned mission.
And yet, the probe refused to crumble.
41 minutes after entry.
Taking advantage of the reprieve at 12.1
bars, the ambitious second round of NMS
sampling finished as the probe continued
its long heated path ever down.
49 minutes after entry.
Well beyond its expected limits, but not
wanting to waste the chance, a third
round of NMS sampling began under an
immense 15.8 bars.
51 minutes after entry.
To avoid any single point catastrophic
mission failures, the electronics on
board were heavy. They'd been made to
survive 20 bars of atmospheric pressure.
The priceless data collected were
transmitted on board with two parallel
and simultaneous streams.
But, suddenly, 51 minutes after entry,
one of the transmitters stopped.
For the next 12 minutes, the remaining
transmitter fluttered, dropping off
before suddenly rising back up.
The beating heart of the probe was
struggling as the sealed box containing
the transmitters had begun to deform
under the growing pressure and
temperature.
1 hour after entry,
silence.
The mission ended in silence.
On board, the heat had risen to 153° C.
The probe had traveled 146 km, far below
where the mission had been expected to
end. 20 minutes later, the orbiter
turned off its receivers, stowing its
antenna, and moving on to join Jupiter's
orbit and to begin its own perilous
journey.
Far below, once the probe had descended
650 km, the temperatures would have
become hot enough to vaporize metal.
Piece by piece, the probe had begun to
be dissected by the king of planets.
As it continued down, mute, each second
the temperature and pressure rose.
Another limb was claimed.
First, the parachute melted.
The descent module, now released from
its slow descent, was free to fall.
Aluminum fittings melted, and within
hours the aluminum itself had completely
vaporized.
4 hours later, the probe's titanium
shell melted with its instruments.
2 hours later, under the weight 5,000
times the surface pressure of Earth, and
1,700° C,
even the titanium evaporated. The probe
was gone,
fully atomized, having joined as a very
small part the planet it had been sent
to study.